A prototype of adding persistence requirements for CDI in EE environments (#746)
jakartaee/platform: specification/src/main/asciidoc/webprofile/jpa-cdi/CDI-JPA.adoc

:cdi-spec: https://jakarta.ee/specifications/cdi/4.1
:jpa-spec: https://jakarta.ee/specifications/persistence/3.1/jakarta-persistence-spec-3.1

=== Jakarta Persistence & Jakarta Context and Dependency Injection (CDI) Integration
This section specifies the requirements for Jakarta EE environments that integrate both {jpa-spec}[Persistence] and {cdi-spec}[CDI].

> 

Reviewer: > I am confused for instance:

@Inject
EntityManager myEntityManager
>
> Which EntityManager is returned? The spec logic seems to imply that this should work and return an EntityManager even though scope and qualifiers were not provided. I think for EntityManagerFactory it is explained more for this case, but I don't know if it is for EntityManager unless I am just missing it.

Wouldn't this be the same as:

```
@PersistenceContext 
EntityManager myEntityManager
```

I think that ^ would just use the first persistence unit found in the application deployment by the Persistence container.  I don't recall any guidance in the Persistence spec on what what happens if there are multiple persistence units defined.

WildFly has a persistence unit hint for marking the default persistence unit (a deployment failure is thrown if there are multiple default persistence units).  I thought we might of discussed this years ago on the jpa spec mailing list but I'm not really sure.

> 

Reviewer 2: > Which `EntityManager` is returned?

The interpretation of such an injection point is specified in great detail by the CDI spec. It's not the place of this text to specify how beans are matched to injection points. All we need to specify here is what are the bean types and qualifiers the bean defined here. Then CDI itself takes care of the rest (according to nontrivial rules).

> 

Reviewer 2: > Wouldn't this be the same as:
>
>     @PersistenceContext 
>     EntityManager myEntityManager
>
> I think that ^ would just use the first persistence unit found in the application deployment by the Persistence container. I don't recall any guidance in the Persistence spec on what what happens if there are multiple persistence units defined.

No. CDI-based injection is never based on "the first thing found". It is always an error if an injection point is ambiguous.

All this is covered in section 5.2 of the CDI 4.1 spec. See, especially, section 5.2.2.

> 

Reviewer: Thanks, I will look at [CDI spec section 5.2.2](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/cdi/4.1/jakarta-cdi-spec-4.1#unsatisfied_and_ambig_dependencies).

The Persistence Specification rules that would apply to `container-managed persistence contexts` and how they resolve referenced persistence units is https://jakarta.ee/specifications/persistence/3.2/jakarta-persistence-spec-3.2#a12459

The current thinking (from a brief discussion this week during the Jakarta EE Platform call) is that the [Persistence spec contract for container-managed persistence contexts](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/persistence/3.2/jakarta-persistence-spec-3.2#container-managed-persistence-contexts) would be followed here as well which includes other Persistence Spec requirements specified through-out the Spec + Javadoc text.  

I think the ask for all of us is to figure out if this Platform change can be included in Jakarta EE 11.

I think that the https://jakarta.ee/specifications/persistence/3.2/jakarta-persistence-spec-3.2#a12459 section does state how a particular persistence unit could be used if it is the "first thing found" as per `When referencing a persistence unit using the unitName annotation element or persistence-unit-name deployment descriptor element, the visibility scope of the persistence unit is determined by its point of definition` part of the `8.2.2. Persistence Unit Scope` spec text.

> 

Reviewer 2: Look, I think we need to take a step back here and understand that CDI is very powerful and that most of the things we need here are already defined by CDI and we don't need to tie ourselves in knots re-saying things that CDI already says. Sure, for historical reasons the Persistence spec says a bunch of stuff that defines how the legacy `@PersistenceUnit` and `@PersistenceContext` annotations work, but we're trying to move away from that: people have asked for _CDI integration_ and that means defining things in terms of CDI concepts.

The proposed text is:

> the container must make available a bean with ... the scope specified by the _scope_ XML element in _persistence.xml_, or _jakarta.transaction.TransactionScoped_ if no scope is explicitly specified

The semantics of the `@TransactionScoped` annotation already tell us everything we need to know about the default lifecycle of the persistence context: and, yes, the persistence context management is going to be essentially the same as what is defined by section 7.7.2 _Container-managed Transaction-scoped Persistence Context_ of the Persistence spec, but instead of being some special thing connected to the `@PersistenceContext` annotation, it's just something we naturally get for free from CDI. Alternatively, if you explicitly specify a _different_ scope in `persistence.xml`, then CDI controls the lifecycle according to the semantics of that scope.

Similarly, this text:

> the container must make available a bean with bean type _EntityManager_, the qualifiers specified by _qualifier_ XML elements in _persistence.xml_, or _jakarta.enterprise.inject.Default_, if no qualifiers are explicitly specified

completely determines how the persistence unit is matched to an injection point, _according to the rules of CDI_. We don't need to look anywhere else than in the CDI spec to find how that works.

The point is that nobody should be looking in the Persistence spec to find out how CDI injection works, or about the lifecycle of contextual beans in CDI.

> 

Reviewer 2: P.S. An example of how **NOT** to do this stuff is provided by sections 12.4.3 and 12.4.4 of the current JMS spec, which purports to define injection of the `JMSContext` via CDI, but doesn't use the language/concepts of CDI.

> 

Reviewer 2: Oh, perhaps confusion arises from the use of the phrase "container-managed entity manager". This is meant in the generic sense of an entity manager which is created and destroyed by the container. It's not a reference to section 7.7 of the Persistence spec. (Though of course the semantics are *extremely* similar by default.)

> 

Reviewer: > The semantics of the @TransactionScoped annotation already tell us everything we need to know about the default lifecycle of the persistence context: and, yes, the persistence context management is going to be essentially the same as what is defined by section 7.7.2 Container-managed Transaction-scoped Persistence Context of the Persistence spec, but instead of being some special thing connected to the @PersistenceContext annotation, it's just something we naturally get for free from CDI. Alternatively, if you explicitly specify a different scope in persistence.xml, then CDI controls the lifecycle according to the semantics of that scope.

At a concrete level, I get that EE deployer code that is already deploying the persistence unit via a call to the PersistenceProvider#createContainerEntityManagerFactory(jakarta.persistence.spi.PersistenceUnitInfo) will meet the additional requirements for CDI in EE environments in a way that integrates with non-CDI code (for the container-managed + transaction-scoped case).  However, I must be wrong as you said that the EE deployer code isn't finding the right persistence unit to use, as that is something we get for free from CDI.

Again, at a concrete level, how does CDI get access to all of the different deployed persistence units that only the EE deployer (internals) has access to?  

Is that made possible by the EE deployer adding something like a https://jakarta.ee/specifications/cdi/4.0/jakarta-cdi-spec-4.0#declaring_disposer_method (perhaps after jakarta.enterprise.inject.spi.AfterDeploymentValidation is fired?)  

I could see how the deployer_method example linked above could have access to the deployed persistence unit.

> 

Reviewer 2: > However, I must be wrong as you said that the EE deployer code isn't finding the right persistence unit to use, as that is something we get for free from CDI.

CDI doesn't need to know anything about the persistence unit or how it is deployed. All CDI needs is for the container to hand it the definition of a bean.

> Again, at a concrete level, how does CDI get access to all of the different deployed persistence units that only the EE deployer (internals) has access to?

I mean to me this is an implementation detail of the bean that the EE container provides to CDI. We don't need to spell out how this works.

> Is that made possible by the EE deployer adding something like a https://jakarta.ee/specifications/cdi/4.0/jakarta-cdi-spec-4.0#declaring_disposer_method (perhaps after jakarta.enterprise.inject.spi.AfterDeploymentValidation is fired?)

Yes, exactly, something like that.

It could be:

- a producer method (which creates an `EntityManager`) + disposer method (which calls `close()` on it), 
- a bean definition registered by a portable extension, or even
- something more implementation-specific in the case when the CDI bean manager is integrated more deeply with the rest of the EE container via vendor-defined SPIs.

Of course the Persistence spec still defines how the container interacts with the Persistence provider in order to bootstrap a persistence unit and create an `EntityManagerFactory`. Nothing about that process changes.

The only new thing is that after creating the `EntityManagerFactory`, the container then makes certain beans available to CDI (most likely via some sort of portable extension, but, again, we don't need to specify that).

> 

Reviewer 3: > Again, at a concrete level, how does CDI get access to all of the different deployed persistence units that only the EE deployer (internals) has access to?

Maybe in different wording; CDI does not go looking for deployed persistence units. Instead, whatever code creates a persistence unit would register it with CDI under the scope and qualifiers associated with that persistence units.

The lookup is just normal CDI then.

From a cursory look I would say though that

```
@PersistenceContext 
EntityManager myEntityManager
```

and

```
@Inject
EntityManager myEntityManager
```

should ultimately result in the same entity manager, but I've got to study things a bit more to say for sure.

> 

Reviewer 2: <blockquote>
From a cursory look I would say though that

```
@PersistenceContext 
EntityManager myEntityManager
```

and

```
@Inject
EntityManager myEntityManager
```
should ultimately result in the same entity manager, but I've got to study things a bit more to say for sure.
</blockquote>

Mmmmm, the current wording doesn't guarantee that (though it also doesn't completely disallow it).

One the reason being: `@PrsistenceContext` always injects a transaction-scoped PC. Whereas the new functionality specified here allows PCs with arbitrary CDI scope, as specified in `persistence.xml`.

==== Obtaining an Entity Manager using CDI

A container environment might feature built-in integration of
Jakarta Persistence with the CDI bean manager, allowing injection
of a container-managed entity manager using the annotation
_jakarta.inject.Inject_. In the Jakarta EE environment, the

> container must feature built-integration of Jakarta Persistence

Reviewer 4: s/built-integration/built-in integration/g

> A container environment might feature built-in integration of
> Jakarta Persistence with the CDI bean manager, allowing injection
> of a container-managed entity manager using the annotation
> _jakarta.inject.Inject_. In the Jakarta EE environment, the
> container must feature built-integration of Jakarta Persistence
> with the CDI bean manager.

Reviewer 2: I originally wrote this text for inclusion in the Persistence spec, but since it's now proposed for the platform spec, I believe it should read:

```suggestion
A Jakarta EE container must feature built-integration of Jakarta 
Persistence with the CDI bean manager, allowing injection
of a container-managed entity manager using the annotation
_jakarta.inject.Inject_.
```

> For each persistence unit, a container which features such
> built-in integration must make available a bean with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each persistence unit, the container must make available 
a bean with:
```

- bean type _EntityManager_,
- the qualifiers specified by _qualifier_ XML elements in
_persistence.xml_, or _jakarta.enterprise.inject.Default_,
if no qualifiers are explicitly specified,
- the scope specified by the _scope_ XML element in
_persistence.xml_, or _jakarta.transaction.TransactionScoped_
if no scope is explicitly specified,

> - no interceptor bindings,

Reviewer 3: What is the intend here? That just by default there are no interceptor bindings, or, that it is forbidden for interceptors to be defined for this type?

Reviewer 5: If we allow to supply a qualifier to avoid some migration concerns, we need an example on how to specify the qualifier in the `persistence.xml`. I guess the .xsd needs to be updated. Is this too late since Jakarta Persistence has been released. I think we should just say the `Default` qualifier will be used. I am not sure how you can add scope either in the `persistence.xml` unless it was done already.

Reviewer 5: See the later section on the explanation. Please add a reference to the later section on the xsd.

Reviewer 2: > That just by default there are no interceptor bindings, or, that it is forbidden for interceptors to be defined for this type?

@arjantijms I'm not sure I understand what you mean by this question, because interceptor bindings belong to beans, not to bean _types_.

 Of course one could define a bean with type `Entity Manager ` and interceptor bindings, but the bean defined _here_ does not have any interceptor bindings, because we don't provide any place to specify such bindings. (We would need to add an element to `persistence.xml`.)

Reviewer 3: > > That just by default there are no interceptor bindings, or, that it is forbidden for interceptors to be defined for this type?
> 
> @arjantijms I'm not sure I understand what you mean by this question, because interceptor bindings belong to beans, not to bean _types_.

Yes, though the text now says:

```
For each persistence unit, a container which features such built-in integration must make available a *bean* with:

no interceptor bindings,
```

I would expect the spec to say what IS required. For things that are NOT required, I would expect those things to be either left out or explicitly saying they are not required.

The way it's written now would probably trigger a TCK engineer to write a test that very specifically checks in whatever way is possible that the injected EntityManager does absolutey not have any interceptor bindings.

If my implementation would now for some reason add interceptor bindings for internal use, say for tracing, or for transaction management or whatever, then this would not be allowed, seemingly. But then the question arises; WHY is this restriction in place?

But from your reply I taste you dont want to specificallty constraint the Bean to not have interceptor bindings, but just that by default it does not need any (spec defined) interceptor bindings.

>  because we don't provide any place to specify such bindings. 

Isn't that already available via an extension? I quite often programmatically add interceptor bindings to beans that way.

Reviewer 2: > If my implementation would now for some reason add interceptor bindings for internal use, say for tracing, or for transaction management or whatever, then this would not be allowed, seemingly. But then the question arises; WHY is this restriction in place?

If the bean has interceptor bindings that are visible to the application developer, then that would result in non-portable behavior. Now, of course, an implementation could in principle have its own internal interceptor binding types, and the bean could in principle have such interceptor bindings. But then such binding types would not be visible to the application programmer, nor to a TCK engineer.

Reviewer 2: > Isn't that already available via an extension? I quite often programmatically add interceptor bindings to beans that way.

I mean, that's fine, nothing in that language says that _portable extensions_ can't add interceptor bindings. Just the bean provided by the container does not have any.

Reviewer 3: > Just the bean provided by the container does not have any.

I hear you, though as a container I can use a portable extensions just as well of course.

The question is perhaps how it would result in non-portable behaviour. Say I would in GlassFish add an interceptor binding to the `Bean<T>` for `EntityManager#persist`,  to track how many times persist is called (I display a nice graph of this in the admin console).

Applications injecting `EntityManager` on my GF instace will have a working `persist` method, and that same code would work on WildFly just as well. Tracking persists calls is just an internal GF feature.

Reviewer 2: Well the application program or framework could associate an interceptor with the given binding type, and then that interceptor would be triggered in this container but not in other containers.

- a bean implementation which satisfies the requirements of
this specification for a container-managed entity manager.

==== Obtaining an Entity Manager Factory using CDI

A container environment might feature built-in integration of
Jakarta Persistence with the CDI bean manager, allowing
injection of a container-managed entity manager factory using
the annotation _jakarta.inject.Inject_. In the Jakarta EE

> environment, the container must feature built-integration of

Reviewer 4: s/built-integration/built-in integration/g

> A container environment might feature built-in integration of
> Jakarta Persistence with the CDI bean manager, allowing
> injection of a container-managed entity manager factory using
> the annotation _jakarta.inject.Inject_. In the Jakarta EE
> environment, the container must feature built-integration of
> Jakarta Persistence with the CDI bean manager.

Reviewer 2: Similarly:

```suggestion
A Jakarta EE container must feature built-integration of
Jakarta Persistence with the CDI bean manager, allowing
injection of a container-managed entity manager factory using
the annotation _jakarta.inject.Inject_.
```

> For each persistence unit, a container which features such
> built-in integration must make available a bean with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each persistence unit, the container must make available 
a bean with:
```

- bean type _EntityManagerFactory_,
- the qualifiers specified by _qualifier_ XML elements in
_persistence.xml_, or _jakarta.enterprise.inject.Default_,
if no qualifiers are explicitly specified,
- scope _jakarta.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped_,
- bean name given by the name of the persistence unit,
- no interceptor bindings,

> - a bean implementation which satisfies the requirements of
> this specification for a container-managed entity manager
> factory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- a bean implementation which satisfies the requirements of
the Persistence specification for a container-managed entity 
manager factory.
```

Furthermore, the container must make available five beans with:

- bean types _CriteriaBuilder_, _PersistenceUnitUtil_, _Cache_,

> _SchemaManager_, and _Metamodel_, respectively,

Reviewer 6: should these be made available for `@Resource` injection and/or DD override (=reachable from JNDI) and as such also some description added to chapter 5?

Reviewer 2: @lukasj anything like that would require mechanisms external to CDI and would significantly complicate this whole thing.

Reviewer 2: (And CDI itself already provides ways to override beans.)

Reviewer 6: If this cannot be made consistent with the rest of resources available through the platform, I would not add this requirement for now

Reviewer: > If this cannot be made consistent with the rest of resources available through the platform, I would not add this requirement for now

Or we could document in the Platform Specification what (Jakarta EE 11) portable applications can expect in the Platform Specification and what this new feature is not integrated with (e.g. Resource and/or DD override, I think extended persistence contexts but not completely sure about that).  

Having said that, I think we do need to prototype this requirement in EE implementations so we can see what EE features do not work (for EE implementations) that should work.

Based on this pr conversation, I understand more of what is expected but I think we need to see this feature actually being used so we can all see what happens when very large applications:
- use this feature with active JTA transaction + existing application code also using the same persistence contexts.
- use this feature with  with no active JTA transaction + existing application code.  

Also, the https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/persistence/persistence_3_2.xsd already has the support for this feature and if we don't define how the Platform uses the new fields, we might end up with a lot different extensions from  the EE vendors, non of which are completely consistent.

Reviewer 3: > should these be made available for @Resource injection and/or DD override (=reachable from JNDI)

I think it's time to let go of @Resource and JNDI. So from my point of view that would be 

-1 -> Do NOT make these available for @Resource injection and/or DD override (=reachable from JNDI)

Reviewer 2: I agree. I don't see the value of `@Resource` or JNDI here. In my mind, that's legacy stuff that we've already moved away from a long time ago.

Reviewer 6: > > should these be made available for @resource injection and/or DD override (=reachable from JNDI)
> 
> I think it's time to let go of @resource and JNDI. So from my point of view that would be
> 
> -1 -> Do NOT make these available for @resource injection and/or DD override (=reachable from JNDI)

then I have to ask - why this functionality has not been deprecated yet? Shouldn't that be the very first step a platform should have taken in order to re-build itself on top of CDI?

Reviewer 3: >  why this functionality has not been deprecated yet? 

There's so many questions there. I think we should have done it in 2009 indeed, but by then the EJB group was still big and powerful, and I think we didn't want to aggitate them too much.

We also shouldn't have just stopped with @Transactional in Java EE 7, but did much more in that release.

It's a sad story alltogether how we coud reinvented ourselves many years ago, but somehow didn't, even though the path was clearly ahead of us.

Java EE/Jakarta Security was the first, in Java EE 8, to add all kinds of resources/services and complete base it on CDI. Completely and utterly ignoring @Resource/JNDI. People though it could not be done. Somehow everything would always need JNDI. But hey, Jakarta Security did it. And now Quarkus and MP also provide tons of services, and it's really true that JNDI is not needed.

Hopefully for EE 12 we can finally deprecate our old friend JNDI and co.

Author: We have an issue that was delayed for EE10 on the deprecation of resource injection and JNDI.
https://github.com/jakartaee/platform/issues/355

- the qualifiers specified by _qualifier_ XML elements in
_persistence.xml_, or _jakarta.enterprise.inject.Default_,
if no qualifiers are explicitly specified,
- scope _jakarta.enterprise.context.Dependent_,
- no interceptor bindings,
- a bean implementation which simply obtains the instance of
the bean type by calling the appropriate getter method of
the _EntityManagerFactory_ bean.

==== persistence.xml Extended Schema

> The Persistence 3.1 specification schema includes an extension point that allows one to add elements for configuration of integration concerns. The required approach for declaring a CDI  scope and qualifier elements.

Reviewer 4: "The required approach.... elements." is not a complete sentence.

> The Persistence 3.1 specification schema includes an extension point that allows one to add elements for configuration of integration concerns. The required approach for declaring a CDI  scope and qualifier elements.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The Persistence 3.2 specification schema includes an extension point that allows one to add elements for configuration of integration concerns. The required approach for declaring a CDI  scope and qualifier elements.
```

Reviewer 6: does the explicit usage of the spec version number make sense here? The version _in action_ is mentioned somewhere at the beginning already

Author: I have removed it from the text, but it does still show up in the schema used in the persistence.xml example.

Its usage is illustrated in the following XML document.

[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<!-- persistence.xml -->
<persistence xmlns="https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/persistence"
        xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
        xsi:schemaLocation="https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/persistence

>           https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/persistence/persistence_3_1.xsd"
>         version="3.1">

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
          https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/persistence/persistence_3_2.xsd"
        version="3.2">
```

    <persistence-unit name="my-unit">
      <provider>org.jpa.SomePersistenceProvider</provider>
      <jta-data-source>java:server/datasources/ExampleDS</jta-data-source>
      <class>org.acme.Employee</class>
      <properties>
        <property name="jpa.ddl.auto" value="create-drop"/>
        <property name="jpa.show_sql" value="true"/>
        <property name="jpa.format_sql" value="true"/>
      </properties>
      <!-- CDI integration -->
      <cdi:scope>com.example.jpa.ACustomScope</cdi:scope>
      <cdi:qualifier>com.example.jpa.CustomQualifier</cdi:qualifier>
  </persistence-unit>

</persistence>
----

> ====  Additional EntityManagerFactory Properties

Reviewer 4: should this be styled? i.e. _EntityManagerFactory_

The following additional properties correspond to the

> new elements and properties in the _persistence.xml_ file when using the persistence-cdi-3.2xsd schema and associated persistenceUnitExtType. When any of these

Reviewer 4: _persistenceUnitExtType_

> properties are specified in the Map parameter passed to the

Reviewer 4: _Map_

Jakarta Persistence with the CDI bean manager.

For each persistence unit, a container which features such
built-in integration must make available a bean with:

- bean type _EntityManagerFactory_,
- the qualifiers specified by _qualifier_ XML elements in
_persistence.xml_, or _jakarta.enterprise.inject.Default_,
if no qualifiers are explicitly specified,
- scope _jakarta.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped_,
- bean name given by the name of the persistence unit,
- no interceptor bindings,
- a bean implementation which satisfies the requirements of
this specification for a container-managed entity manager
factory.

Furthermore, the container must make available five beans with:

- bean types _CriteriaBuilder_, _PersistenceUnitUtil_, _Cache_,
_SchemaManager_, and _Metamodel_, respectively,
- the qualifiers specified by _qualifier_ XML elements in
_persistence.xml_, or _jakarta.enterprise.inject.Default_,
if no qualifiers are explicitly specified,
- scope _jakarta.enterprise.context.Dependent_,
- no interceptor bindings,
- a bean implementation which simply obtains the instance of
the bean type by calling the appropriate getter method of
the _EntityManagerFactory_ bean.

> ==== Obtaining an Entity Manager Factory using CDI

Reviewer: This `Obtaining an Entity Manager Factory using CDI` section is a duplicate of same above.

Reviewer 2: One of these passages is meant to be about injecting the `EntitiyManager`. Copy/paste error, I guess.

Author: Changed to Injecting...

A container environment might feature built-in integration of
Jakarta Persistence with the CDI bean manager, allowing

> injection of a container-managed entity manager factory using

Reviewer: Instead of referring to a `container-managed entity manager factory`, we might instead focus on the `container-managed entity manager` or even a `CDI-managed entity manager`.  

It is also 100% accurate to also talk about the container-managed entity manager factory because that is what the EE implementations/runtimes provide which is minimally obtained from the https://jakarta.ee/specifications/persistence/3.1/apidocs/jakarta.persistence/jakarta/persistence/spi/persistenceprovider#createContainerEntityManagerFactory(jakarta.persistence.spi.PersistenceUnitInfo,java.util.Map) call, however that isn't a term defined by the Jakarta Persistence specification (e.g. applications using `@PersistenceUnit EntityManagerFactory emf;`.

Reviewer 8: CDI-managed EMF is `app managed`?

Reviewer: @hantsy EMF is just the EMF, entity managers created by the application calling [EntityManagerFactory#createEntityManager](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/persistence/3.1/apidocs/jakarta.persistence/jakarta/persistence/entitymanagerfactory#createEntityManager()) are always app managed entity managers.

I'd like to list possible design choices [here](https://github.com/jakartaee/platform/pull/746#issuecomment-1812727696) for discussion regarding what exactly an application could do with a CDI-Managed entity manager (persistence context) along the lines of whether the underlying entity manager that is used for a CDI-Managed entity manager can be shared with `@PersistenceContext EntityManager myentitymanager;`.

this specification for a container-managed entity manager
factory.

Furthermore, the container must make available five beans with:

- bean types _CriteriaBuilder_, _PersistenceUnitUtil_, _Cache_,
_SchemaManager_, and _Metamodel_, respectively,
- the qualifiers specified by _qualifier_ XML elements in
_persistence.xml_, or _jakarta.enterprise.inject.Default_,
if no qualifiers are explicitly specified,
- scope _jakarta.enterprise.context.Dependent_,
- no interceptor bindings,
- a bean implementation which simply obtains the instance of
the bean type by calling the appropriate getter method of
the _EntityManagerFactory_ bean.

==== persistence.xml Extended Schema
This integration section defines an extension of the Persistence specification schema to add scope and qualifier elements.

[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<!-- persistence.xml schema -->
<xs:schema targetNamespace="https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/persistence"
            xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
            xmlns:persistence="https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/persistence"
            elementFormDefault="qualified"
            attributeFormDefault="unqualified"
            version="3.0">

>     <xs:include schemaLocation="persistence_3_0.xsd" />

Reviewer 6: I am not a big fan of this way of extending schema - the drawback I see here is that the schema has to be updated every time the original one changes.

I'm thinking about an alternative - what if we add an extension point to the persistence schema itself somewhere? Sth like:

```
    <xsd:element name="persistence">
        <xsd:complexType>
            <xsd:sequence>
                <xsd:element name="persistence-unit" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded">
                    <xsd:complexType>
                        <xsd:sequence>
                            <xsd:element name="description" type="xsd:string" minOccurs="0"></xsd:element>
                            <xsd:element name="provider" type="xsd:string" minOccurs="0"></xsd:element>
                            ...
                            <xsd:element name="properties" minOccurs="0">
                           <xsd:any namespace="##other" processContents="lax"/>
                        </xsd:sequence>
                    </xsd:complexType>
                </xsd:element>
            </xsd:sequence>
        </xsd:complexType>
    </xsd:element name="persistence">
...
```
the usage then could look like:
```
    <persistence-unit xsi:type="persistenceUnitExtType" name="my-unit" xmlns:cdi="https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/persistence-cdi">
...
        <cdi:scope>com.example.jpa.ACustomScope</cdi:scope>
        <cdi:qualifier>com.example.jpa.CustomQualifier</cdi:qualifier>
    </persistence-unit>
</persistence>
```

The question is - does this _extension_ need to be available through `PersistenceUnitInfo`? If so, how? Ideally, it should be `org.w3c.dom.Node`, but I don't think I like the use of that type here

Author: If it does not need to be available via PersistenceUnitInfo, then there does not need for an extension to persistence.xml. In that case we could just require the info be passed into the Map passed to the factory method. Otherwise, your suggestion about the alternative syntax looks good to me.

Reviewer 2: ```xml
  <persistence-unit name="my-unit" xmlns:cdi="https://jakarta.ee/xml/ns/persistence-cdi">
     ...
    <cdi:scope>com.example.jpa.ACustomScope</cdi:scope>
    <cdi:qualifier>com.example.jpa.CustomQualifier</cdi:qualifier>
  </persistence-unit>
````

This looks nice indeed.
